When we think of the matter of humility, we realize there are many examples in the Bible to help us some positive, some negative.
Perhaps now we could just think for a few moments about one negative example and one positive example of two men who both had the name Saul.
The first one we'll think about is the man who became known as King Saul of Israel.
If you'd like to take your Bibles, please turn with me to the beginning of the book of 1 Samuel.
You'll notice the outline of contents there gives us an overview of what happened at that particular time.
So in that outline of contents, we notice there in chapter 10 it says, Saul anointed to be King.
Do you remember the circumstances?
At that point was Saul proud.
Was he presenting himself as the man, the one who would lead the nation into a new era?
No. We remember how the Scriptures described that he was hiding in the luggage.
So he didn't want a prominent position. He was hesitant to take that role.
But Jehovah blessed him and he was anointed.
And if we look on a little further, we see in chapter 11 that he defeats the Ammonites.
At that point it does specifically say that Jehovah's spirit was with him.
And also there's mention of the fact that humbly he did not retaliate against those who opposed him.
But when we look down to verse chapter 13, what does it say there?
Saul acts presumptuously.
So he had lost his humility and lost Jehovah's favor.
How long into his rulership was this?
Well, if we look at chapter 13 verse 1, it tells us that it was right at the beginning, maybe just two or three years had passed at this point.
So what does that tell us?
He lost his humility very quickly after being anointed as king.
Not only that, but Jehovah allowed him to continue on in that position for perhaps over 35 years.
So what lessons do we learn from that with regard to ourselves?
Well, the first lesson is perhaps before being appointed to be an elder or some other service privilege,
we may have been hesitant, we may have been humble, we may not have wanted that particular position, we may have felt we weren't qualified.
Maybe we were very humble in our viewpoint.
But remember the case of King Saul, how quickly once he got appointed in that position, how quickly he lost humility.
The second lesson is that just because we remain in a certain role, position of authority,
does not in itself prove that Jehovah approves of us or that we are remaining humble.
So that's why it's so important for us to continually analyze ourselves to see if we are remaining humble and we do still have that humility that we perhaps exhibited many years ago.
Now the second example we'd like to discuss is that of Saul who became well known as the Apostle Paul.
Well, how was Saul's start? Was he a humble man? Was he like the man who became King Saul? Was he hiding in the luggage? No, he was right there in the front.
In fact, in First Timothy chapter 1 verse 13, the Apostle Paul describes himself in those days as an insolent man.
And that expression can indicate someone who speaks in a very downgrading way to others, humiliates them and certainly would show a very proud, arrogant man.
And yet what happened to this man's Saul?
Well, he progressed, became a Christian and Jehovah's Spirit helped him to become a very humble person.
Now how do we know that the Apostle Paul really was very humble? Well, there are many things that we could mention, but perhaps let's just talk about one particular aspect.
I'm going to ask a question for you to answer yourself. Do you think the Apostle Paul was an eloquent speaker? Was he very good at speaking to others?
Your initial reaction might be to say, no, let's think a little bit more before we give a definite answer.
When we look at the book of Acts, what do we see? We see recorded there many of the speeches that the Apostle Paul gave.
In Antioch, he gave a very, very effective witness. In Listera, remember when he and Barnabas were there, the people thought that he was Hermes because he was taking the lead in speaking at that time.
How often have we referred to Acts 17, where Paul in a very skillful manner, in a very difficult circumstance, was able to preach to people using this altar for an unknown God, even quoted from some of the local prophets or, sorry, the poets?
So this helps us to see that he was a very effective person when he spoke to others. On the steps when he was taken from the temple and the crowd wanted to kill him, he again gave a very effective speech.
Not to mention, of course, a number of times that he spoke before many of the Gentile rulers and gave a very effective witness.
So now how are we feeling about the Apostle Paul's ability to speak? Well, probably with thinking, he must have been a very eloquent speaker. He could really project the message and persuade others.
But now why was there a little hesitancy on our part to say Paul was an excellent speaker? Well, maybe it comes from one scripture. Let's look at 2 Corinthians chapter 11 and verse 6.
And here the Apostle Paul speaking to the brothers in Corinth says, but even if I am unskilled in speech, I certainly am not in knowledge.
Was Paul saying here he didn't know how to speak? No, he was answering the super final apostles who criticized him, who spoke in a very disparaging manner with regard to him. In fact, they even said his speech was contemptible.
And when Paul says here, but even if I am unskilled, is he really saying he wasn't skilled in speaking? No, he was answering them according to their own standards that they had set up.
So with that in mind, we might ask a question, why is it the brothers in Corinth? Perhaps had this impression after what we've just considered with regard to Paul's background?
Well, let's have a look at 1 Corinthians and this brings us back to the matter of humility. So 1 Corinthians chapter 2 and we're going to read together verses 1 through 5.
So when I came to you, brothers, I did not come with extravagance speech or wisdom declaring the sacred secret of God to you.
So Paul deliberately did not come to them with using all the debating methods that the Corinthians were used to. Notice in verse 2 what it tells us,
for I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ and him executed on the stake. This was a deliberate decision on the part of the apostle Paul not to use this extravagance speech, this wisdom that he could have used.
Notice in verses 3 through 5 how he continues on and I came to in weakness and in fear and with much trembling and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power so that your faith might be not on men's wisdom but in God's power.
What is Paul saying here? He realized the brothers in Corinth had a problem. They put too much emphasis on worldly wisdom and the way that people presented themselves. No doubt that was part of why they had divisions in the congregation.
So Paul trying to avoid that situation and putting emphasis truly on Jehovah's Holy Spirit and the power of the message decided not to use this so-called wisdom that he could have used.
Isn't that a very humble action on his part? He was willing to be thought of badly. He was willing to have people say that he couldn't speak properly because he wanted to focus the glory on Jehovah.
What do we learn from this example? Well we see that an arrogant person can become humble but also we see that at times we may decide if we are humble not to display the wisdom and talents that we have perhaps to downplay them so that the glory goes to Jehovah.
So what an interesting set of examples for us. May we never be like King Saul who lost his humility and may we be like the apostle Paul who continued to be humble willing to put himself down in order for Jehovah's glory to be in the fall.